JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn
back now to the Supreme
Court's decision to take up
the Trump administration's
travel ban and the ongoing
fight over the health
care replacement bill.
For all that, it's time for
politics Monday with Tamara
Keith of NPR and Stu Rothenberg,
senior editor at
Inside Elections.
And welcome to both of you.
So, Tam, I'm going to start
with you on the Supreme Court
ruling on the travel ban.
It is a limited victory
for the president.
They did allow a
reinstatement of a part of it.
How much of a victory is it?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well, it's a victory.
And the president hasn't
had a lot of victories
on this travel ban.
It's been blocked in
various courts all the way
up to the Supreme Court.
He was 0-2 in the appeals
courts before getting
to the Supreme Court.
Now at least he will be
heard in the Supreme Court.
Now, it is not the 9-0 victory
that the president declared.
There's not a decision yet.
There's only a decision
to hear the case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How
do you see it, Stu?
STUART ROTHENBERG, Inside
Elections: Yes, similarly.
I guess everything is a
win or loss, so it's a
win for the president.
I don't see it having dramatic
political implications, frankly.
I think the lines
have been drawn.
You're either for the
ban or against the ban.
To some extent, the
final decision has been
kicked down the road,
the can has been kicked
down the road a bit.
So, I think it's a
win for the president.
But compared to health care,
foreign policy, jobs, the
economy, I just don't see it as
a decisive issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, so
speaking of health care, we know
the debate in the Senate goes
on.
We heard Lisa Desjardins, Julie
Rovner talking with John Yang
earlier talking about where
the state of play is.
Today, Tam, the Congressional
Budget Office weighed in with
-- and saying almost as many
- - 22 million more Americans
would be hurt by this plan,
would lose coverage, which is
almost as many as
the House plan.
Now, you have just heard
there's some reaction to
that from the White House.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
The White House is reacting
much the way that it reacted
the last time the Congressional
Budget Office came out with
one of these blockbuster
reports saying millions
of people would lose
coverage.
And they're saying is that
the CBO hasn't always been
accurate and estimating health
care, so, all right, everyone,
just look in the other
direction, please ignore that.
And the other point that the
statement makes is that the
president said he would repeal
and replace the Affordable Care
Act, and this bill does it,
and, therefore, that's what
they want.
Now, there are some in the
Senate who actually say the bill
doesn't repeal Obamacare, it's
more of a modification of the
preexisting structure, and
that is one of the objections.
There are many out there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stu, what is
the political state of play?
What are the pressures on these
Republicans as they try to
decide what to do about this?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, I think
they're in a very difficult
position, a rock and a hard
place.
On one hand, they want
to accomplish something.
They have a mandate from
conservatives, Republicans,
Trump backers to do something.
On the other hand, they're
concerned about opinion back
home and they're concerned about
the coverage.
I got a release from
Mitch -- you got a release
from the White House.
I saw a release from
Mitch McConnell right
before I came on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm glad we
are all well-covered here.
STUART ROTHENBERG: And he said:
"The Senate will soon take
action on the bill that the
Congressional Budget Office just
confirmed will reduce the growth
in premiums under Obamacare,
reduce taxes on the middle
class, and reduce the deficit."
Premiums, taxes, deficit.
What McConnell didn't
talk about was health
care, quality of coverage.
TAMARA KEITH: Or out-of-pocket
expenses, which this CBO
report says could be massive.
STUART ROTHENBERG: And voters
care about these things.
They care a lot
about these things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Stu, again,
as you -- you follow these, the
political pressures on these
members of the Senate as
they think about - - the ones
who are you for reelection.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Judy, I
was looking at some numbers,
and it's really stunning.
What's the one group, two
groups that are supposed to
benefit most from this health
care bill?
Younger voters and healthier
people, right, because they have
been subsidizing older people
and people who
aren't as healthy.
And what group is most opposed
to the American Health Care
Act and most critical of Donald
Trump?
Eighteen-to-34-year-olds,
younger voters, the kind of
voters that should like this.
So, I think it's a real
problem for Republicans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will
certainly see what happens.
There's so much to ask about.
Tam, the president has been
tweeting a lot over the weekend,
continuing to today, about
the reports that the
Obama administration had
information about Russian
hacking, interference
in last year's presidential
election and didn't do
a lot about it until
after the election.
The president's going after
former President Obama, saying
he's the one to blame, he's
the one who obstructed.
Where does this
get the president?
How successful a
strategy is this?
TAMARA KEITH: The president's
position on Russian hacking
and metaling in the election
is wildly confusing, because,
previously, he had said it
was a hoax that was invented
by the Democrats just to explain
their loss in the election.
Now I guess he's OK with the
hoax, as long as it's President
-- former President Obama's
fault.
And President Trump does have
a remarkable ability to make
everything President Obama's
fault, one way or another.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stu, the
president has -- this
has been the monkey on
the president's back
for months and
months and months.
He doesn't like to talk about
it, but it seems as if this
particular report that came out
a couple days ago in
The Washington Post,
he seized on that.
STUART ROTHENBERG: I
think you're right.
He's looking for some
explanation to prove
that he was right and
Obama is wrong, it's
all Obama's fault.
Look, I think President Obama
did -- one thing that Donald
Trump says is correct is that
President Obama did assume that
Hillary Clinton was going to
win the election and that he
could not take on
this issue publicly.
But can you imagine what Donald
Trump would have said if, a
few weeks before election,
Barack Obama got on
television and said it's
all about the Russians
taking over our elections?
Trump would have said, it's
rigged, the election is rigged.
TAMARA KEITH: He already
was saying it was rigged.
And that may have
influenced how the Obama
administration reacted.
That's what they're saying.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, in fact,
privately, that's what the
Obama folks are saying.
Just very quickly, something
that we kind of overlooked in
all the other news last week,
and the was the announcement
by the Supreme Court that
they're going to take up, Stu,
a redistricting case
that affects the census,
that is going to have
a big effect on how
our politics potentially...
STUART ROTHENBERG: This is
huge, or, as some people, say,
"yuge," because this goes to
the very heart of how
districts are drawn,
who draws the districts.
And that goes to the very
heart of who gets elected and
which party benefits from how
the districts are drawn.
So, this is a thing to
absolutely keep an eye on.
The court has been very reticent
to get involved on the issues
of is this a political question
or not?
But by taking the case,
I guess they're going
to address it at least.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
backdrop is that the way
redistricting gerrymandering
has been happening,
Tam, quickly, it has benefited
the Republicans, and this
is a chance to look at that.
TAMARA KEITH: Well, and
redistricting that has made
seats safe is influencing things
like this very health
care debate, because
members of Congress are
more worried, particularly
Republican members of Congress
are more worried about primaries
from the right than they are
about a general election fight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well,
that one's in the fall.
So is the big
travel ban argument.
We're going to have a
lot to look forward to.
But, in the meantime, we have
got so much to cover right now.
Stu Rothenberg, Tamara Keith,
thank you both, Politics Monday.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Thanks, Judy.